---
layout: post
title: A Journey of a Thousand Miles...
---

You will never squint so hard in your life as when your new advisor gives you a task that you so desperately want to impress her with your result, but its so new to you all you can do is stare at the material she pointed you towards hoping that you might develop Superman x-ray vision and see that simple instructions are written in the watermarks--like I don't know, with calcium deposits or something. So there you are literally trying to squint electromagnetic rays out of your eyeballs, while in the back of your mind you wonder why you thought this was the right career for you, when clearly your advisor hasn't realized that you don't have x-ray vision and frankly are pessimistic that you'll ever develop it.

That's sort of what it's like to be a new grad student doing serious research for the first time. This is a hurdle that everyone allegedly overcomes, but it's hard to see the green pastures past the fog. There is one bit of solace for me--I actually really like the kinds of things I'm doing. I like the unstructured nature of it, I like the reading until my eyes bleed, and I like feeling like I'm a cool Mr. Robot-esque hacker, which I'm not. The question on the table for me, is how do I turn this fire hydrant's torrent of information into managable chunks. In other words, what do I need to do to make my brain feel like an expertly solved Tetris game, rather than that one drawer that everyone has where they pack in what I can only describe as valuable garbage?

THIS ANSWER MIGHT SURPRISE YOU.

Unless you were expecting me not to have an answer, which is exactly what I'm here to say. But there's good news! Which is that I'd like to find an (some?) answer(s), and share what I learn.

Though my research has just begun, there is one lesson I've learned already. Before I get to that though, you might be curious on how I came upon it. This one was the result of a meeting with Cristina (the professor I'm doing research with), where I sent her an email with what I thought was an amazing idea that would certainly find all of the world's expolits, and she told me (in the nicest way possible) that what I thought was an amazing idea was not really even an Idea, but more of a funny thing I noticed.

This brings us to our first lesson: funny things I noticed are useless unless they have some context. There are all sorts of tools and techniques available for finding software vulnerabilities, but just as all software has different goals, all vulnerability-finding tools have particular facets which they are designed to explore and exploit. In my first idea-email to Cristina, I told her I had an idea about using state machine exploration on a particular protocol we're investigating, where she reminded me that state machine exploration is a great tool, but doesn't actually make any sense with this particular protocol, which was one of those things that's the most obvious truth in the world after someone has told you.

The other aspect about context is that even when you find a foothold, something you think you can exploit, you need to have some knowledge about what it even means to exploit the thing you're investigating. This where the idea of a Threat Model comes in. It's something that I need to learn more about, but my current understanding is that, it's basically a definition of what a vulnerability means in the context of the current software or protocol. For instance, if the protocol is an authentication protocol, then the Threat Model might include the ability of one user to get the access credentials of another user. A full understanding of the Threat Model is essential for directing your research--that's what Cristina says anyway, and seeing as I'm still trying to squint my way through my first semester, I think I'll take her advice to heart.
